International Journal of Environmental Analytical Chemistry
ISSN: 0306-7319 (Print) 1029-0397 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/geac20

# MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme induced the chromogenic reactions of ABTS and TMB to visual detection of Fe<sup>2+</sup> and Pb<sup>2+</sup> ions in water

Kai Sun, Shun-Yao Li, Hui-Ling Chen, Qing-Guo Huang & Youbin Si

**To cite this article:** Kai Sun, Shun-Yao Li, Hui-Ling Chen, Qing-Guo Huang & Youbin Si (2019): MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme induced the chromogenic reactions of ABTS and TMB to visual detection of Fe<sup>2+</sup> and Pb<sup>2+</sup> ions in water, International Journal of Environmental Analytical Chemistry, DOI: 10.1080/03067319.2019.1599875

**To link to this article:** https://doi.org/10.1080/03067319.2019.1599875

Published online: 02 Apr 2019.

---

# MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme induced the chromogenic reactions of ABTS and TMB to visual detection of Fe<sup>2+</sup> and Pb<sup>2+</sup> ions in water

Kai Sun<sup>a</sup>, Shun-Yao Li<sup>b</sup>, Hui-Ling Chen<sup>a</sup>, Qing-Guo Huang<sup>c</sup> and Youbin Si<sup>a</sup>

<sup>a</sup>Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Farmland Ecological Conservation and Pollution Prevention, School of Resources and Environment, Anhui Agricultural University, Hefei, China; <sup>b</sup>College of Resources and Environmental Sciences, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China; <sup>c</sup>Department of Crop and Soil Sciences, University of Georgia, Griffin, GA, USA

### ABSTRACT
In this study, we used a simple and rapid colourimetric reaction for visual sensing of Fe<sup>2+</sup> and Pb<sup>2+</sup> ions in water by employing nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> as a natural oxidase mimic to respectively catalyse ABTS and TMB in citrate-phosphate buffer solution (C-PBS) at 25°C and pH 3.8. It was found that nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> possessed highly oxidase-mimicking activity with the K<sub>m</sub> values of 0.030 and 0.027 toward ABTS and TMB, respectively, indicating TMB had a stronger affinity on nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> than ABTS. Interestingly, the presence of 0.01 mmol·L<sup>−1</sup> Fe<sup>2+</sup>/Pb<sup>2+</sup> ion was able to significantly down-regulate the activity of MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme in nano-MnO<sub>2</sub>-mediated ABTS reaction processes (P < 0.01), which mainly due to the strong adsorption of metal ion toward nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> surface via the electrostatic attractions, thus leading to the passivation and inactivation of MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme catalytic activity. Thereinto, Fe<sup>2+</sup> reacted with multivalent manganese by oxidation-reduction, while Pb<sup>2+</sup> was specifically adsorbed onto the surface of MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme and formed complexes. Notably, only Fe<sup>2+</sup> ion inhibited the activity of MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme-TMB with a detection limit as low as 1.0 μmol·L<sup>−1</sup>. In MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme-ABTS sensing systems, Fe<sup>2+</sup> and Pb<sup>2+</sup> ions detection limit of 0.5 and 2.0 μmol·L<sup>−1</sup> were, respectively, achieved with a linear response range of 0–0.02 and 0–0.8 mmol·L<sup>−1</sup>, implying the developed MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme-ABTS sensor was potentially applicable for the visual determination of Fe<sup>2+</sup> and Pb<sup>2+</sup> ions in water. In the real water samples, MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme-ABTS achieved high accuracy (relative errors: 3.4–10.5%) and recovery (96–110%) for respective detection of Fe<sup>2+</sup> and Pb<sup>2+</sup> ions. The simple and rapid MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme-ABTS sensing systems might provide a practical assay for visual detection of Fe<sup>2+</sup> and Pb<sup>2+</sup> ions in the environmental water samples.

**ARTICLE HISTORY**
Received 5 January 2019
Accepted 4 March 2019

**KEYWORDS**
MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme; ABTS and TMB; chromogenic reaction; Fe<sup>2+</sup> and Pb<sup>2+</sup> ions; visual detection

---

### 1. Introduction
Currently, nanoscale metal oxides (NMOs) as nanozymes have confirmed to be highly effective in versatile applications [1–3]. Compared with the natural enzymes, enormous attentions have been directed towards the utilisation of NMOs in imitating the catalytic activity due to their higher stability and lower production cost [4,5]. For example, the intrinsic enzyme-mimicking properties of CuO, CeO<sub>2</sub>, Co<sub>3</sub>O<sub>4</sub>, MnO<sub>2</sub>, Mn<sub>3</sub>O<sub>4</sub>, Fe<sub>2</sub>O<sub>3</sub>, and Fe<sub>3</sub>O<sub>4</sub> have been widely used in bio-sensing, immunoassay, pollutants degradation, and environmental monitoring [6–9]. These applications of nanozymes are based on the high affinity of substrates onto the surface of NMOs, thus altering their catalytic properties [10]. Among these nanozymes, the oxidase-mimicking activity of NMOs especially attracted increasing interest because they avoided the participation of H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> [11–13].

It is well documented that nanoscale MnO<sub>2</sub> with high stability and recycling properties, as well as remarkable catalytic activity, has become a fascinating nanozyme [11,14]. MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme could catalyse the chromogenic reactions of 2,2′-azino-bis(3-ethyl-benzothiazoline)-6-sulphonate (ABTS) and 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) for the bio-sensing, bio-imaging, single-stranded DNA, and drug delivery [15–17]. For instance, Liu et al. revealed that MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme could mimic the oxidative activity of oxidase for catalysing the multicolour reaction of TMB via forming blue, green, and yellow products, which had been applied for the detection of glutathione in biological samples [18]. This showed that MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme could be proposed to be a possible cost-effective catalyst for the detection of target substance in water [19]. Nonetheless, the enzyme-mimicking activity of nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> has rarely been understood to the visual detection of metal ions in the aquatic environment.

At present, the pollution and hazards of metal ions on wild species and human have increasingly drawn focus worldwide. This is due to they have been extensively applied to the industrial fields, inevitably leading to the release of metal ions into the natural water environment [20]. Notably, accumulation of toxic metal ions higher than hazardous levels can cause acute health problems to most aquatic biota [21]. Therefore, simply and rapidly recognising metal ions is of great significance in the aqueous environment to protect aquatic biota and human health. It is well known that inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICPMS) could be used to test the metal ions in water; however, the method was costly and time-consuming. Recently, MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme-mediated colourimetric reactions have proven to be highly effective for sensing applications because it enables rapid visual detection without the aid of any advanced instruments [17,18,22]. Hence, it is fascinating that whether metal ions can adsorb and deposit onto the surface of MnO<sub>2</sub> nanoparticle to switch its oxidase-mimicking activity with a linear relationship between the concentration of metal ions and the activity of MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme [10,23].

In this study, the oxidase-mimicking activity of nanoscale MnO<sub>2</sub> was, respectively, assessed by inducing the chromogenic reactions of ABTS and TMB. In particular, MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme was utilised to the visual detection of metal ions in water by the colour variations of reaction systems, based on the fact that metal ions tend to adsorb and deposit onto the surface of nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> as a result of electrostatic attractions, subsequently altering the catalytic activity of MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme. Finally, MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme-ABTS sensing systems were selectively utilised for the visual detection of Fe<sup>2+</sup> and Pb<sup>2+</sup> ions in the real water samples to confirm its potential applications. Our findings might provide a simple and rapid assay for the visual detection of Fe<sup>2+</sup> and Pb<sup>2+</sup> ions at the real water samples using MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme-ABTS sensor.

### 2. Experimental
#### 2.1. Chemicals and materials
All reagents used were analytical grade unless otherwise indicated. Nanoscale MnO<sub>2</sub> (≥99.9%) was procured from DK Nano Technology Co., Ltd. (Beijing, China). The characteristic of nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> is shown in Fig. S1 (Supplementary Information, SI). ABTS (CAS: 30,931–67-0) and TMB (CAS: 54,827–17-7) were obtained from Energy Chemical Technology Co., Ltd (Shanghai, China). Metal sulfates (i.e. FeSO<sub>4</sub> · 7H<sub>2</sub>O, Al<sub>2</sub>(SO<sub>4</sub>)<sub>3</sub>, CuSO<sub>4</sub>, MgSO<sub>4</sub>, ZnSO<sub>4</sub>, PbSO<sub>4</sub>, and MnSO<sub>4</sub>·H<sub>2</sub>O) were purchased from Shanghai Aladdin Bio-chem Technology Co., Ltd. Fresh metal ions stock solutions (100 mmol·L<sup>−1</sup>) were freshly prepared in Milli-Q ultrapure water (18.2 MΩ·cm) and stored at 4°C. The buffer used in the experiments was a citrate-phosphate buffer solution (C-PBS: 10 mmol·L<sup>−1</sup> citric acid and 10 mmol·L<sup>−1</sup> Na<sub>2</sub>HPO<sub>4</sub>, pH 3.8), which could maintain pH value and ionic strength of all the reaction solutions.

#### 2.2. Activity measurement of nano-MnO<sub>2</sub>
To investigate the oxidase-mimicking activity of nano-MnO<sub>2</sub>, the nanoparticle was performed in 10 mL of a C-PBS (10 mmol·L<sup>−1</sup>) at 25°C and pH 3.8 containing 0.01 mg·mL<sup>−1</sup> nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> and 1.0 mmol·L<sup>−1</sup> chromogenic substrate (ABTS or TMB). After nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> and chromogenic substrate had been mixed thoroughly, kinetic measurements of the oxidase-like reactions of nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> were conducted using a UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Shimadzu, UV-2550) in time course mode at 420 nm for ABTS and at 652 nm for TMB in a quartz cuvette with a 1 cm light path. The mixed solution was monitored every 20 s for 3 min by recording the change of absorbance values. One unit of nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> activity (U·mL<sup>−1</sup>) is defined as the amount of nanozyme that causes an absorbance change at 420 nm/652 nm in C-PBS (10 mmol·L<sup>−1</sup>) containing 1.0 mmol·L<sup>−1</sup> ABTS/TMB per minute at 25°C and pH 3.8. Thus, the oxidase-like activity of nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> was calculated by the rate of absorbance change. For comparison, experimental nano-MnO<sub>2</sub>-free C-PBS was used as a blank control. All experiments were performed in triplicate.

#### 2.3. Kinetic analysis
Kinetic experiments were conducted in a 50 mL flask at 25°C and pH 3.8 using 1.0 mmol·L<sup>−1</sup> ABTS/TMB with varying concentrations of nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> (0.002–0.03 mg·mL<sup>−1</sup>) and a fixed concentration of nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> (0.01 mg·mL<sup>−1</sup>) with varying concentrations of ABTS/TMB (0.005–1.0 mmol·L<sup>−1</sup>) in 10 mL C-PBS (10 mmol·L<sup>−1</sup>). The absorbency variation of reaction systems was recorded at 420 nm for ABTS and at 652 nm for TMB with 20 s interval at kinetics mode for 3 min incubation using UV-Vis spectrophotometer. The kinetic parameters K<sub>m</sub> and V<sub>max</sub> were obtained by the Lineweaver–Burk plot method as follows: $1/V = (K_m + [S]) / (V_{max} \cdot [S])$, where V is the initial reaction velocity, [S] is the substrate concentration, K<sub>m</sub> is the Michaelis constant, and V<sub>max</sub> is the maximal velocity of reaction. All experiments were performed in triplicate.

#### 2.4. Influence of pH and temperature on nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> oxidase-mimicking activity
Similar experimental procedures to those described above were used to evaluate the effects of pH and temperature on the oxidase-mimicking activity of nano-MnO<sub>2</sub>. The reactions were performed at different pH (2.0–10.0) and a wide range of temperature (10–90°C). For pH-dependent of reaction, 10 mL of 10 mmol·L<sup>−1</sup> C-PBS containing 0.01 mg·mL<sup>−1</sup> nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> was mixed with 1.0 mmol·L<sup>−1</sup> ABTS/TMB and the temperature was maintained at 25°C. For temperature-dependent of reaction, 10 mL of 10 mmol·L<sup>−1</sup> C-PBS containing 0.01 mg·mL<sup>−1</sup> nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> was mixed with 1.0 mmol·L<sup>−1</sup> ABTS/TMB at pH 3.8. All experiments were performed in triplicate.

#### 2.5. Detection of metal ions by MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme
To investigate the effects of metal ions on the activity of MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme, a series of mixtures containing different metal ions (i.e. Fe<sup>2+</sup>, Al<sup>3+</sup>, Cu<sup>2+</sup>, Mg<sup>2+</sup>, Zn<sup>2+</sup>, Pb<sup>2+</sup>, and Mn<sup>2+</sup> ions) and nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> (0.01 mg·mL<sup>−1</sup>) in 10 mmol·L<sup>−1</sup> C-PBS were equilibrated at 25°C and pH 3.8 for 30 min, and subsequently 1.0 mmol·L<sup>−1</sup> ABTS/TMB was added to each of the mixtures and detected rapidly with 20 s interval for 3 min incubation using UV-Vis spectrophotometer, with a wavelength of 420 nm/652 nm. All experiments were performed in triplicate.

Based on the above results, MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme-ABTS sensing systems for Fe<sup>2+</sup> and Pb<sup>2+</sup> ions detection in the real water samples were also assessed, respectively. Ten times diluted real water samples (pond water 1–2 from Anhui Agricultural University campus) in C-PBS (10 mmol·L<sup>−1</sup>, pH 3.8) were spiked with 0–0.02 mmol·L<sup>−1</sup> Fe<sup>2+</sup> or 0–0.8 mmol·L<sup>−1</sup> Pb<sup>2+</sup>, and were then detected using the described MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme-ABTS sensor following processes similar to those used for the standard solution. The absorbance at 420 nm was measured using UV-Vis spectrophotometer. In particular, the relative errors and recoveries for the detection of Fe<sup>2+</sup> and Pb<sup>2+</sup> ions were calculated in MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme-ABTS sensing systems, respectively. Additionally, the concentrations of Fe<sup>2+</sup> and Pb<sup>2+</sup> ions in the real water samples were also determined by ICPMS (6300 Series, Thermo Fourier, USA), respectively. All experiments were performed in quintuplicate.

#### 2.6. Statistical analysis
All data were processed with Excel 2010 (Microsoft, Redmond, WA). Each datapoint in the figures and tables represents an average value. The standard deviation in parallel samples is shown in the figures with an error bar.

### 3. Results and discussion
#### 3.1. The oxidase-mimicking activity of nano-mno<sub>2</sub>
To test the oxidase-like activity of nano-MnO<sub>2</sub>, ABTS and TMB were, respectively, chosen as the oxidase substrates, and all reaction kinetics were monitored at 420 nm for ABTS and at 652 nm for TMB. The changes in absorbance values over time by nano-MnO<sub>2</sub>-catalysed oxidation of ABTS and TMB are shown in Figure 1. Nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> could, respectively, catalyse the oxidation of ABTS (Figure 1(a)) and TMB (Figure 1(b)) to form the green and blue colour products with a remarkable change in absorption at 420 nm and 652 nm, like laccase-mediated ABTS and TMB chromogenic reactions. Previous reports also indicated that nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> could readily oxidise ABTS and TMB to produce the visual end products of ABTS and TMB at acidic pH, through one-electron transfer processes [17,18,24]. In our study, the oxidase-like activities of nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> were, respectively, 0.041 U·mL<sup>−1</sup> for ABTS and 0.065 U·mL<sup>−1</sup> for TMB (R<sup>2</sup> > 0.98), and nano-MnO<sub>2</sub>-free control did not show the oxidase-like activity, demonstrating nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> possessed the oxidase-mimicking activity. Additionally, the reproducibility of nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> was also investigated. The oxidase-like activity of nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> decreased inappreciably as the reaction cycle increased from 0-run to 3-run, suggesting the reusability of nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> as a recyclable oxidase-like.

The role of dissolved O<sub>2</sub> in nano-MnO<sub>2</sub>-catalysed oxidation of ABTS and TMB was evaluated by purging the reaction solution with N<sub>2</sub>, resulting in a decrease in the oxidase-like activity of nano-MnO<sub>2</sub>, and revealing the dissolved O<sub>2</sub> in the catalytic reactions acted as an electron acceptor for MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme-substrate to form ABTS and TMB chromogenic products [13,17]. This data is agreement with an earlier report that indicated the oxidation of substrate via MnO<sub>2</sub> nanosheet and BSA-MnO<sub>2</sub> nanoparticle [18]. Additionally, the stability of nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> in reaction systems was also studied over a one-month storage period. It is noted that the release of Mn<sup>2+</sup> increased from 0.005 to 0.224 mg·L<sup>−1</sup> as the storage time increased in C-PBS at pH 3.8. Nevertheless, no significant difference in the ABTS and TMB oxidation were detected, implying the capacity of MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme to oxidise substrate in reaction systems remain stable. Combining with previous reports on NMOs-based nanozymes, our results demonstrated that nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> possessed a high catalytic activity and stability to, respectively, oxidise the chromogenic reactions of ABTS and TMB.

![Figure 1. The oxidase-mimicking activities of nano-MnO2 for catalysing oxidation of substrates. (a) Nano-MnO2-catalysed absorbency variation of ABTS over time at 420 m; (b) Nano-MnO2-catalysed absorbency variation of TMB over time at 652 nm. Reaction conditions: [Nano-MnO2] = 0.01 mg·mL−1, [ABTS] = 1.0 mmol·L−1, [TMB] = 1.0 mmol·Lfig−1, [Temperature] = 25°C, pH 3.8. Error bars represent the standard deviation (n = 3).](figure1.png)

#### 3.2. Influence of MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme concentration on ABTS/TMB oxidation
We further assessed the influence of MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme concentration on ABTS and TMB oxidation for a 3-min reaction using UV-Vis spectroscopy. As shown in Figure 2, MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme-catalysed oxidation of ABTS and TMB, respectively, showed a distinct absorption peak at the wavelength of 420 nm and 652 nm, and the increase of this absorbance values over MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme concentration were obvious resulting from ABTS and TMB oxidation by MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme (Figure 2(a,c)). Moreover, the variation of MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme activity was also observed by adding different concentrations of nano-MnO<sub>2</sub>. Increasing the concentrations of nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> from 0.002 to 0.03 mg·mL<sup>−1</sup> resulted in a linear increase in the oxidase-mimicking activities of nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> by the oxidation of ABTS and TMB (Figure 2(b,d)). According to the estimated correlation coefficients of nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> concentration and its oxidase-like activity, the apparent pseudo-second-order rate coefficients were, respectively, determined to be 3.56 U·mg<sup>−1</sup> for ABTS and 6.80 U·mg<sup>−1</sup> for TMB (R<sup>2</sup> > 0.92). These results demonstrated that increasing the concentrations of nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> facilitated the oxidase-like activities of nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> to catalyse the oxidation of ABTS and TMB.

![Figure 2. (a, c) UV-Vis absorption spectra of ABTS and TMB reacted with nano-MnO2 nanozyme for a 3-min incubation; (b, d) Concentration-dependent kinetic studies of the oxidase-like activities of nano-MnO2 for ABTS and TMB reactions. Reaction conditions: [Nano-MnO2] = 0.002–0.03 mg·mL−1, [ABTS] = 1.0 mmol·L−1, [TMB] = 1.0 mmol·L−1, [Temperature] = 25°C, pH 3.8.](figure2.png)

#### 3.3. Influence of substrate concentration on ABTS/TMB oxidation
For illuminating the catalytic reaction mechanism and gaining the kinetic parameters (K<sub>m</sub> and V<sub>max</sub>), MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme-catalysed the steady-state kinetics of 0.005–1.0 mmol·L<sup>−1</sup> ABTS and TMB oxidation were investigated in 10 mL C-PBS for 1 min incubation at 25°C and pH 3.8. The K<sub>m</sub> and V<sub>max</sub> values were determined from Lineweaver–Burk plots (Fig. S2, SI). In MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme-mediated reaction systems, both ABTS and TMB were transformed into the chromogenic products could make the nano-MnO<sub>2</sub>-based nanozyme an intrinsic signal amplifier (Figure 3). Interestingly, the concentration of TMB was in the range of 0.005–0.01 mmol·L<sup>−1</sup>, the reaction solution was yellow, while the concentration of TMB was in the range of 0.02–0.04 mmol·L<sup>−1</sup> and over 0.04 mmol·L<sup>−1</sup>, the reaction solution showed blue and green colours, respectively, which mainly due to the formation of TMB diamine and diimine by MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme [18,25]. From the kinetic analysis, it was found that the K<sub>m</sub> values were, respectively, 0.030 and 0.027 for ABTS and TMB (also listed Figure 3), indicating MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme showed a higher affinity towards TMB than ABTS. The V<sub>max</sub> values of MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme for ABTS and TMB were, respectively, 0.046 and 0.113, revealing MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme-TMB reacted faster than MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme-ABTS. It is noted that the oxidase-like activity of nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> and the kinetic parameter values were investigated at acidic pH because of limited oxidase-like activity at neutral and alkaline pH.

![Figure 3. Experimental KM and Vmax values determined for MnO2 nanozyme-mediated oxidation of ABTS and TMB, respectively. Reaction conditions: [Nano-MnO2] = 0.01 mg·mL−1, [ABTS] = 0.005–1.0 mmol·L−1, [TMB] = 0.005–1.0 mmol·L−1, [Temperature] = 25°C, pH 3.8.](figure3.png)

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th rowspan="2">Substrates</th>
      <th colspan="3">Measured parameters</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>K<sub>m</sub></th>
      <th>V<sub>max</sub></th>
      <th>R<sup>2</sup></th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>ABTS</td>
      <td>0.030</td>
      <td>0.046</td>
      <td>0.9799</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>TMB</td>
      <td>0.027</td>
      <td>0.113</td>
      <td>0.9715</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

#### 3.4. Influence of pH and temperature on ABTS/TMB oxidation
pH and temperature were played two vital factors in the oxidase-like activity of nano-MnO<sub>2</sub>. Similarly to the natural oxidase, the catalytic activity of MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme was also dependent on pH and temperature [26]. As shown in Figure 4, the effect of pH and temperature on the oxidase-like activities of nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> demonstrated that the catalytic activities of MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme decreased from 0.1019 to 0 U·mL<sup>−1</sup> for ABTS and from 0.0755 to 0.0112 U·mL<sup>−1</sup> for TMB with the rise of reaction pH from 2.0 to 7.0, whereas the oxidase-like activities of MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme remained stable from 15°C to 75°C. It was found that only 0.006 and 0.030 U·mL<sup>−1</sup> of MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme activities were retained at pH 6.0 for ABTS and TMB, respectively, while 0.039 and 0.050 U·mL<sup>−1</sup> of MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme activities were, respectively, retained even at 90°C for ABTS and TMB. Earlier studies also demonstrated that the catalytic oxidation of ABTS and TMB by different nanozymes was found maximum at acidic pH than neutral and alkaline conditions [18,27,28]. These results indicated that the comparative oxidase-like activity of nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> over a broad range of pH and temperature, exhibiting a wide range of pH and thermal stability, unlike natural oxidase was easily denatured and inactivated [28,29]. Based on the above studies, the experimental detecting conditions of MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme activity were thus obtained as follows: pH 3.8, 25°C, and 0.01 mg·mL<sup>−1</sup> of nano-MnO<sub>2</sub>.

![Figure 4. pH- and temperature-dependent the oxidase-like activities of nano-MnO2 for catalysing the oxidation of ABTS and TMB. (a, c) For pH-dependent of reactions, the temperature was maintained at 25°C; (b, d) For temperature-dependent of reactions, the pH was maintained at 3.8. Reaction conditions: [Nano-MnO2] = 0.01 mg·mL−1, [ABTS] = 1.0 mmol·L−1, [TMB] = 1.0 mmol·L−1, [Temperature] = 10–90°C, pH 2.0–10.0. Error bars represent the standard deviation (n = 3).](figure4.png)

#### 3.5. Effect of metal ions on MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme-catalysed ABTS/TMB oxidation
Simply and rapidly recognising metal ions is of important significance in the aqueous environment. Previous studies have indicated that BiOI, Fe<sub>3</sub>O<sub>4</sub>, and BSA-stabilised Pt nanozymes could be used to rapidly detect Hg<sup>2+</sup>, Pb<sup>2+</sup>, and Zn<sup>2+</sup> ions due to their intrinsic advantage and high stability under harsh conditions [30,31]. In this study, the activities of MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme were selectivity evaluated by the various metal ions involving Fe<sup>2+</sup>, Al<sup>3+</sup>, Cu<sup>2+</sup>, Mg<sup>2+</sup>, Zn<sup>2+</sup>, Pb<sup>2+</sup>, and Mn<sup>2+</sup> ions in 10 mL C-PBS at 25°C and pH 3.8. As shown in Figure 5, the oxidase-mimicking activities of nano-MnO<sub>2</sub>-ABTS and nano-MnO<sub>2</sub>-TMB were, respectively, 0.039 and 0.068 U·mL<sup>−1</sup> in the blank controls (BC, i.e. metal ion-free). Compared with BC, the activities of nano-MnO<sub>2</sub>-ABTS were significantly inhibited in the presence of Fe<sup>2+</sup> and Pb<sup>2+</sup> (P < 0.01), whereas the activity of nano-MnO<sub>2</sub>-TMB was only suppressed with Fe<sup>2+</sup> present (P < 0.05). The restraining activity of MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme with Fe<sup>2+</sup> and Pb<sup>2+</sup> ions present occurred likely due to the strong adsorption of Fe<sup>2+</sup> and Pb<sup>2+</sup> ions onto the nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> surface via the electrostatic attractions, which impeded the single-electron transfer to the substrate [30,31]. Additionally, we also investigated and compared the influence of Co<sup>2+</sup>, Fe<sup>3+</sup>, Hg<sup>2+</sup>, K<sup>+</sup>, Ca<sup>2+</sup>, Ag<sup>2+</sup>, and Cd<sup>2+</sup> ions on MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme activity. Similarly, there was no significant effect on the activity of MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme by them. These results demonstrated that MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme might be used to easily and rapidly detect Fe<sup>2+</sup> and Pb<sup>2+</sup> ions in aqueous solution.

![Figure 5. Effect of different metal ions (i.e. Fe2+, Al3+, Cu2+, Mg2+, Zn2+, Pb2+, and Mn2+ ions) on MnO2 nanozyme activities by catalysing the oxidation of ABTS and TMB, respectively. Reaction conditions: [Nano-MnO2] = 0.01 mg·mL−1, [ABTS] = 1.0 mmol·L−1, [TMB] = 1.0 mmol·L−1, [Metal ion] = 0.01 mmol·L−1, [Temperature] = 25°C, pH 3.8. Error bars represent the standard deviation (n = 3).](figure5.png)

#### 3.6. MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme-based sensor for detecting Fe<sup>2+</sup> and Pb<sup>2+</sup>
It is possible to derive a quantitative relationship between metal ion concentration and the activity of MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme. As shown in Figure 6, a good linear correlation between the oxidase-like activity of nano-MnO<sub>2</sub> and the concentration of Fe<sup>2+</sup>/Pb<sup>2+</sup> ion was established at 25°C and pH 3.8. The correlation coefficients values (R<sup>2</sup> > 0.98) for Fe<sup>2+</sup> and Pb<sup>2+</sup> ions were −3.9974 and −0.0472, respectively (Figure 6(a,b)). In particular, increasing the concentration of Fe<sup>2+</sup>/Pb<sup>2+</sup> ion results in a colour progression from green to colourless in MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme-ABTS systems. Similarly, increasing the concentrations of Fe<sup>2+</sup> ion results in a colour progression from blue to colourless in MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme-TMB systems. The correlation coefficients values (R<sup>2</sup> > 0.96) for Fe<sup>2+</sup> ion was −1.6303 (Figure 6(c)).

Hsu et al. indicated that BiOI nanocomposite-based sensing systems allowed the detection of Pb<sup>2+</sup> down to nanomolar quantity [30]. Nawaz et al. revealed that cellulose-based fluorescent sensor could be used for the detection of Fe<sup>2+</sup> ion, and the detection limit for Fe<sup>2+</sup> ion was micromolar range [32]. In our study, the high sensitivity and wide dynamic range for the detection of Fe<sup>2+</sup> ion proved that MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme allowed for detecting Fe<sup>2+</sup> ion with a limit of detection of less than 0.5 μmol·L<sup>−1</sup>, which was lower than the maximum level of Fe<sup>2+</sup> ion (5 μmol·L<sup>−1</sup>) in drinking water permitted by the national standards GB 5749–2006 sanitary standard for drinking water in China. Therefore, the MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme-ABTS sensor was potentially applicable for visual determination of low-level Fe<sup>2+</sup> ion in water.

To further explore the possible interactions between metal ion and MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme, a differential UV-Vis spectrometry approach was performed [33]. The differential absorbance spectrum (DAS) was calculated by the following equation: $\Delta A_{DAS} = A_{mixture} - A_{substrate} - A_{metal ion}$, where A<sub>mixture</sub>, A<sub>substrate</sub>, and A<sub>metal ion</sub> are, respectively, the absorbance wavelength of the mixture solution at 390–490 nm for ABTS and at 350–700 nm for TMB, and the corresponding reference ABTS/TMB and metal ion solution. As shown in Figure 7, the DAS of MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme-ABTS systems with Fe<sup>2+</sup> and Pb<sup>2+</sup> ions present had an intensive positive peak at 420 nm (Figure 7(a,b)), while the DAS of MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme-TMB systems with Fe<sup>2+</sup> ion present had two intensive positive peaks at 370 and 652 nm (Figure 7(c)). The variation of DAS implied that Fe<sup>2+</sup> and Pb<sup>2+</sup> ions strongly adsorbed to the surface of MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme via the electrostatic attractions, thereby leading to the one-electron transfer between the MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme and substrate might have been impeded [30]. Notably, Fe<sup>2+</sup> was adsorbed onto the surface of MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme and reacted with multivalent manganese by oxidation-reduction, while Pb<sup>2+</sup> was specifically adsorbed onto the surface of MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme and formed complexes.

![Figure 6. Linear correlation between the oxidase-like activity of nano-MnO2 and the concentration of metal ion. (a, b) Fe2+ (0–0.02 mmol·L−1) and Pb2+ (0–0.8 mmol·L−1) ions concentrations-dependent the oxidase-like activities of nano-MnO2 for catalysing the oxidation of ABTS; (c) Fe2+ (0–0.04 mmol·L−1) ion concentrations-dependent the oxidase-like activities of nano-MnO2 for catalysing the oxidation of TMB. Reaction conditions: [Nano-MnO2] = 0.01 mg·mL−1, [ABTS] = 1.0 mmol·L−1, [TMB] = 1.0 mmol·L−1, [Temperature] = 25°C, pH 3.8. Error bars represent the standard deviation (n = 3).](figure6.png)

![Figure 7. The UV-Vis differential absorbance spectra (DAS) calculated on the basis of the data recorded at different metal ion concentrations. (a, b) Fe2+ (0–0.02 mmol·L−1) and Pb2+ (0–0.8 mmol·L−1) ions concentrations-dependent the UV-Vis DAS in MnO2 nanozyme-ABTS systems; (c) Fe2+ (0–0.04 mmol·L−1) ion concentrations-dependent the UV-Vis DAS in MnO2 nanozyme-TMB systems. Reaction conditions: [Nano-MnO2] = 0.01 mg·mL−1, [ABTS] = 1.0 mmol·L−1, [TMB] = 1.0 mmol·L−1, [Temperature] = 25°C, pH 3.8. Error bars represent the standard deviation (n = 3).](figure7.png)

#### 3.7. Detection of Fe<sup>2+</sup> and Pb<sup>2+</sup> ions in the real water by MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme-ABTS
To verify MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme is applicable for the real environmental water samples, spiked-recovery tests with different concentrations of Fe<sup>2+</sup> and Pb<sup>2+</sup> ions were, respectively, carried out using the pond water 1 and 2 from Anhui Agricultural University via above-described method. The recovery rates and relative errors were, respectively, calculated as 96–110% and 3.4–10.5% for Fe<sup>2+</sup> and Pb<sup>2+</sup> ions spiked in the pond water 1 and 2 (Table S1, SI), implying the reliability and feasibility of the proposed method. The concentrations of Fe<sup>2+</sup> and Pb<sup>2+</sup> ions in the pond water 1 and 2 were also determined by ICPMS. As a result, the concentrations of 0.001–0.0206 and 0.04987–0.4013 mmol·L<sup>−1</sup> were, respectively, determined for Fe<sup>2+</sup> and Pb<sup>2+</sup> ions using ICPMS, which showed no significant difference compared with MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme-ABTS. These results confirmed that the developed MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme-ABTS sensing systems could be potentially applicable for easily and rapidly quantising the concentration of Fe<sup>2+</sup> and Pb<sup>2+</sup> ions in the real water environment, respectively. However, MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme was unable to determine ultralow-level Fe<sup>2+</sup> ion and/or low-level Pb<sup>2+</sup> ion, therefore, a more sensitive method should be developed with a lower detection limit.

### 4. Conclusions
In our study, nanoscale MnO<sub>2</sub> as a catalyst possessed highly oxidase-like activity at 25°C and pH 3.8, which was confirmed by the chromogenic reactions of ABTS and TMB. MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme showed several advantages compared with natural enzymes, for instance, easy preparation, low-cost, higher stability, and better catalytic activity. Hence, we developed MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme-substrate systems to selectively detect metal ions in C-PBS and pond water. Results indicated that the presence of 0.01 mmol·L<sup>−1</sup> Fe<sup>2+</sup>/Pb<sup>2+</sup> ion significantly reduced the reaction activity of MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme-ABTS (P < 0.01), mainly owing to the strong adsorption of Fe<sup>2+</sup>/Pb<sup>2+</sup> ion toward nano-MnO<sub>2</sub>, thereby altering the surface properties of MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme by different mechanisms. Fe<sup>2+</sup> and Pb<sup>2+</sup> ions detection limit of 0.5 and 2.0 μmol·L<sup>−1</sup> were, respectively, achieved with a linear response range of 0–0.02 and 0–0.8 mmol·L<sup>−1</sup>. In the real water samples, MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme-ABTS also achieved high accuracy (relative errors: 3.4–10.5%) and recovery (96–110%) for respective detection of Fe<sup>2+</sup> and Pb<sup>2+</sup> ions. These findings suggested that MnO<sub>2</sub> nanozyme-ABTS sensing systems might provide a potential application for visual detection of Fe<sup>2+</sup> and Pb<sup>2+</sup> ions in the environmental water samples.